# Lesson 5

## Vocaburary

tɔɔnníi - Now
pə̀ət - To open
…rʉ̂yaŋ - Have…yet?
yaŋ mây… - Not…yet
jà - Will
wan thîi - Date
thâwrày - How much?
phʉ̂an - Friend
yàak - To want
rian - To study / To learn
khâa rian - Tuition
bəə thoo - Telephone number
rooŋrian - School
bəə - Number

## Phrases

Q: rooŋrian pə̀ət rʉ́yaŋ (school open have.. yet?)
(+): pə̀ət lɛ́ɛw
(-): yaŋ mây pə̀ət
English:
Q: Has th school opened yet?
A: +/-

---

Q: khun kin khâaw rʉ́yaŋ (school open have.. yet?)
(+): kin lɛ́ɛw
(-): yaŋ mây kin
English:
Q: Have you eaten already?
A: +/-

---

Q: khâaw phàt thâwrày (fried rice how much?)
A: khâaw phàt sǎam sìp hâa bàat
English:
Q: How much is fried rice?
A: Fired rice is 35 baht

---

Q: khâa rian thâwrày (fee school how much?)
A: khâa rian hâa phan kâaw rɔ́ɔy kâaw sìp bàat
English:
Q: How much is the school fee?
A: The school fee is 5990 baht

---

Q: rooŋrian pə̀ət wan thîi thâwrày (school open date how much?)
A: rooŋrian pə̀ət wan thîi sìp hâa
English:
Q: What date will the school open?
A: The school will open on the 15th.

---

Q: wan níi wan thîi thâwrày (today date how much?)
A: wan níi wan thîi yîi sìp
English:
Q: What date is it today?
A: Today is the 20th

---

Q: bəə thoo rooŋrian bəə ʔaray (telephone number school number what?)
A: bəə thoo rooŋrian bəə sǔun kâaw jèt sɔ̌ɔŋ sɔ̌ɔŋ pɛ̀ɛt pɛ̀ɛt nʉ̀ŋ jèt pɛ̀ɛt
English:
Q: What is the school’s telephone number?
A: The school’s telephone number is 097-228-8178

---

Q: bəə thoo khun Lisa bəə ʔaray (telephone number Mrs. Lisa number what?)
A: bəə thoo khun Lisa bəə sǔun pɛ̀ɛt nʉ̀ŋ sɔ̌ɔŋ sǎam sìi hâa hòk jèt pɛ̀ɛt
English:
Q: What is Lisa’s telephone number?
A: Lisa’s telephone number is 081-234-5678